Docs for common workflows: query scheduling (#1841)
mozilla/bigquery-etl: docs/cookbooks/common_workflows.md

# Common bigquery-etl workflows

This is a quick guide of how to perform common workflows in bigquery-etl using the `bqetl` CLI.

For any workflow, the bigquery-etl repositiory needs to be locally available, for example by cloning the repository, and the `bqetl` CLI needs to be installed by running `./bqetl bootstrap`.

> ## Adding a new scheduled query

Reviewer: We should cross-link between this section and wlach's longer-form article on adding a new scheduled query. These are good complementary views.

Reviewer 2: As a note, the cookbook I made was based on an earlier version that @scholtzan shared with me. I do worry a bit about these going out of sync with each other -- I guess my question is, does it have value to have this short form version? The tutorial isn't *that* long.

> 1. Run `./bqetl query create <dataset>.<table>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run `./bqetl query create <dataset>.<table>_<version>`
```

>     * Specifiy the desired destination dataset and table name for `<dataset>.<table>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Specify the desired destination dataset and table name for `<dataset>.<table>`
```

    * Directories and files are generated automatically 
1. Open `query.sql` file that has been created in `sql/moz-fx-data-shared-prod/<dataset>/<table>/` to write the query
1. Run `./bqetl query schema update <dataset>.<table>` to generate the `schema.yaml` file

>     * Optionally add column descriptions to `schema.yaml`

Reviewer 2: The tutorial does not currently have this information, which was just added.

Reviewer: I do think it's more likely that we'll keep this short form up to date. Updating the long-form involves wordsmithing and explaining context that requires more effort than updating a bullet point. Given that the long-form version is told in a specific context for creating a specific dataset, I think there's some challenge there in terms of what it means to keep it "up to date" since we'd be talking about actions that were not actually performed for the case in question. It may be reasonable to preface that long-form piece with a statement that it's a snapshot in time of the workflow as of January 2021.

Author: Currently, adding a schema is not strictly required (we only have it for clients_daily) so the steps in the tutorial are still very much valid as described. I do think that in the long run we might want to migrate over to schemas, that's why I included them here. Once that becomes the standard it'd make sense to update the tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Ok, got it. Maybe best to add a comment here that this is not yet required, but recommended. Sounds like we can update the tutorial later.

1. Open the `metadata.yaml` file in `sql/moz-fx-data-shared-prod/<dataset>/<table>/`
    * Add a description of the query
    * Add BigQuery information such as table partitioning or clustering
        * See [clients_daily_v6](https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl/blob/master/sql/moz-fx-data-shared-prod/telemetry_derived/clients_daily_v6/metadata.yaml) for reference
1. Run `./bqetl query validate <dataset>.<table>` to dry run and format the query
1. To schedule the query, first select a DAG from the `./bqetl dag info` list or create a new DAG `./bqetl dag create <bqetl_new_dag>` 
1. Run `./bqetl query schedule <dataset>.<table> --dag <bqetl_dag>` to schedule the query
1. Run `./bqetl dag generate <bqetl_dag>` to update the DAG file
1. Create a pull request
    * CI fails since table doesn't exist yet
1. PR gets reviewed and eventually approved

> 1. Create destination table: `./bqetl query schema deploy`

Reviewer: We should mention that DE will need to do this step. Perhaps it's worth assuming in these workflows that the audience does not have DE creds.

1. Merge pull-request
1. Backfill data
    * Option 1: via Airflow interface
    * Option 2: `./bqetl query backfill <dataset>.<table>`

## Update an existing query

1. Open the `query.sql` file of the query to be updated and make changes
1. Run `./bqetl query validate <dataset>.<table>` to dry run and format the query

> 1. If the query is scheduled, run `./bqetl dag generate <bqetl_dag>` to update the DAG file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the query scheduling metadata has changed, run `./bqetl dag generate <bqetl_dag>` to update the DAG file
```

> 1. Optionally, run `./bqetl query schema update <dataset>.<table>` to make local `schema.yaml` updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the query adds new columns, run `./bqetl query schema update <dataset>.<table>` to make local `schema.yaml` updates
```
